In this video, we'll learn how copy
and move constructors and overloaded
assignment work with inheritance.
As we've seen, copy and
move constructors and the
copy and move assignment
operators are not automatically
inherited from the base class.
First, let's remember that
you may not have to provide
these operations at all.
Depending on your class and its
composition, the compiler provided
versions may be all you need.
However, we can explicitly
invoke these special
constructors and the overloaded assignment
operators in our base class from
the derived class if necessary.
First, let's look at
the copy constructor.
If we need to copy a derived object,
then we must ensure that the base part
of that derived object is also copied.
If that base class has a copy
constructor, then we can explicitly
invoke it in our derived copy
constructor's initialization list.
This is very similar to what
we did with our non-special
constructors in the previous video.
The only part that might be
confusing is that the base class
constructor expects a reference
to a base object, but we have a
derived object in the derived class.
In this case, the derived object is
referenced by the variable other.
So we can invoke the base class and
pass in other, how does that work?
Well, remember we
have is a inheritance.
So a derived is a base.
And since a derived is a base,
we can pass in a drive to a
method that expects a base.
In this case, the compiler uses
slicing and slices out the base
part of the derived object.
Slicing can sometimes cause issues,
but in this case, it's fine since
what we want to do is copy the
base part of the derived object.
Let's see the entire
process in context.
In this example, we have our
base class, and it has an
integer attribute named value.
And let's just focus on
the copy constructor.
We construct a new object based on
the other object, and we simply copy
other.value to this dot value and
display a message to the console.
You may be wondering why we
need a copy constructor at all
in this example, and you'd be
absolutely correct, we don't.
The compiler provided copy constructor
would be perfectly appropriate here.
However, for instructional
purposes, I'm writing the copy
constructor so that we can see
exactly what's being called.
Okay, so now let's
see the derived class.
Here's the derived class.
Notice that it's derived publicly
from base, and it adds an integer
attribute name doubled value.
The derived class has its own copy
constructor that expects a ref to a
derived object that will be copied.
In this case, we're explicitly
copying the base part of other
by invoking the base class copy
constructor in the derived copy
constructor's initialization list.
Again, notice that we pass the
other object, which will be
sliced to yield its base part.
Once we copy the base part, we can
take care of copying double value and
then display a message to the console.
The move constructor
works the same way.
Now let's see how overloaded
copy assignment works.
Here's our base class again,
and it has an overloaded
copy assignment operator.
In this method, we check for
self-assignment, and then we assign
the right-hand side's values to this
object, and we return this object.
This is exactly what we've learned
already and done previously.
Now let's see the derived class.
Here is our derived class, which
is publicly derived from base.
As before, it adds a
double value attribute.
It also has an overloaded
copy assignment operator.
In this method, it's important
that we assign the base part
of the derived object and then
take care of the doubled value.
So after we check for self-assignment,
we call our base classes
overloaded assignment operator
and pass in the right-hand side
object that we want to assign.
This will take care of
assigning the base part.
Then we simply set double
value to the right-hand sides
double value to complete the
assignment of the derived part.
Finally, we just
return to this object.
Note that if we don't explicitly
call the base classes overloaded
assignment operator, then the
base part will not be assigned.
Again, the move assignment
works in a similar manner.
Okay, so let's recap.
Often you don't need to provide
your own copy, move constructors
or overloaded assignment operators.
If you do not define them in the
derived class, then the compiler
will create them automatically and
call the base class versions for you.
If you do provide them in the derived
class, then you must invoke the
base versions explicitly yourself.
Finally, be careful when you
use raw pointers and dynamically
allocated memory, especially if
both the base and the derived
classes have raw pointers.
If so, you'll likely want
deep copy semantics for both
the base and derived classes.
So let's head over to the IDE, and
we'll step through this example.
Okay, so I'm back in the IDE.
I'm in the section 15 workspace in
the CopyConstructorAssignmentOperator project
Now this project is very similar
to what we've seen before.
I'll scroll up here, and you can
see we have a base class that has an
integer attribute called value and
then we've got a no args constructor
an overloaded integer constructor,
a copy constructor here and an
overloaded copy assignment operator.
And these are exactly like we've seen
before, and we also have a destructor,
of course, down here at the bottom.
What we're doing here is when we
get no args, we'll set value to 0.
When we get an integer, we'll set
value to whatever integer we get.
In this case, here's
my copy constructor.
Again, the compiler provided
one would have been great but I
want to make sure that you see
how these things are called.
So in this case, I'm just copying
the others value to this value,
and the same thing with the
overloaded copy assignment operator.
I'm checking that we don't
have self-assignment, and I'm
just assigning the right-hand
sides value to this value.
Okay, great.
Now let me close down this
derive so we'll get to the
derived in a little bit.
So if we run this, we've
got -- here's a real simple main.
And I've got a break
point right on line 65.
The first thing we want to
do is we want to create a b
object, and we're providing
an integer as an initializer.
What we expect there is that the
overloaded integer constructor fires,
and that's exactly what will happen.
Then we've got a copy
constructor because we're
creating a b1 based on a b.
And then finally, an
assignment operator.
And this is copy assignment here.
This is an l-value.
Okay, so let's walk through this,
and this should be pretty much
review from what we've done before.
I just want to make sure that
you understand the base part
before we do the derived part.
All right, so I'm right here
on line 65, I'm just about to
create that object right here b.
So let's step through this, and
we expect the base overloaded
integer constructor to be
called, and that's exactly where
we are right here on line 16.
We'll set the value to 100,
which is what x is right here,
and we'll display int base
constructor, and that's it.
We've just constructed this object b.
Let's take a look at it real quick,
you can see its value is 100.
And that's a base class object.
Now we're going to construct
b1, which is also a base
class object based on b.
So we're going to call
the copy constructor.
And you can see the copy
constructor right here on line 19.
So let's do that,
and I double clicked.
But you'll see what I'm in here
we're in base, and we set this
value to the others value, and we
just -- we're going to displace base
copy constructor here in a second.
So let me execute that, and that's it.
So now you can see that b and
b1 are indeed copies of one
another, and we use the base
copy constructor to do that.
Finally, we're going
to say b equals b1.
In this case, b already exists.
So this is not a constructor,
this is copy assignment.
So we expect this method right here
on line 24 to be called because
that's my copy assignment operator.
So I'll step through this.
There it's called.
We'll just say base operator
equals being called.
It's not self-assignment, and
I'm simply assigning the right
hands value to this value, and
returning the object, and I'm done.
Okay, so you can see exactly
what's happened, exactly
what we expected, right.
Now we're going to unwind because
these objects are going out of scope.
So we expect b1 to be destroyed first,
and then b to be destroyed second.
So the first destructor is the one
for b1, and we'll execute that.
There you can see the
output right here.
And then the destructor
for the b object executes,
and our program is done.
Okay, so now let me
comment these lines out.
And what we'll do is we'll
uncomment these lines, and we'll
go through this code in a sec.
I'm going to move that
break point down to line 69.
And let's take a look at our derived
class right here, I'll expand it.
So here we have a derived class
that is derived publicly from base.
It adds its own
attribute doubled value.
Remember, it gets value from base,
but we've added double value.
And here I've got a no args
constructor, and it invokes the base
classes, no args constructor because
we want to make sure that the --
I mean this would happen automatically,
but I'm just doing explicitly here.
Then we've got the overloaded
constructor for the drive.
Then what we do here is we call
the overloaded base constructor
for an int right here.
And when that's done, then we
take care of initializing our
own stuff, which in this case is
doubled value, which we simply
initialize it to 2 times x.
And then we've got our copy
constructor right here.
It expects a derived.
And what we do here is we
call our base classes copy
constructor, and we pass other.
Other is a derived.
Remember, base expects a base,
but since a derived is a base, we
can certainly pass other in here.
And when we go through the
debugger in this case, I'll show
you the slicing and how it works.
Then we initialize our
part, and we're done.
And then finally, we've got
the assignment operator.
The copy assignment operator where
we check for self-assignment.
And this line is
really important here.
What I'm doing here is we're
calling our base classes overloaded
assignment operator, and we're
passing in the right-hand side.
Again, that method in our base
class expects a base object here,
right a ref to a base object.
What we're doing here is
we're passing in a derived.
So the same idea we're
going to get slicing there.
Then once the base is assigned,
I take care of assigning the part
of the derived that really this
method is only concerned about,
and we return this, and we're done.
Okay so let's take a look
at the main real quick.
Here we are -- it's very similar
to the example with the base.
Here we're creating d, which
is a derived class object.
And we're using the initializer
the integer initializer, so it'll
so it'll call the overloaded constructor.
Then we're copy
constructing d1 from d.
And then finally, we're going to
do copy assignment from d1 to d.
Okay, so I think that's -- I think you
get the picture of what's going on.
It'll definitely make sense
now when we step through.
It so let's start the debugger
and step through this example.
So we're right here on line 69.
We're just about to
construct that d object.
We expect this constructor right
here on line 43 to execute.
That's the overloaded constructor
that expects an integer.
So I'll step in.
And that's exactly where I'm at.
Now I need to construct
the base part of me.
So I'm going to invoke my
base classes, overloaded
constructor and pass in x to it.
So you can see that that's
what's happened now.
I'm now in my base classes
constructor, which is going
to take care of initializing
that base part of me.
So we'll do that.
We'll display base constructor, and
you can see now that I'm on line 45.
So I'm back in my derived constructor.
It just initialized the base.
It initialized double val, and
now it's just going to do a simple
display statement, and we're good.
So we've just created that d object.
And you can see the d object
looks like 100 for my base value
and 200 for my doubled value.
Okay, so now let's look at
the copy constructor, that's
what's being called here.
Remember, we're constructing -- let
me scroll up just a little bit here.
We're constructing d1 based on d.
So what we expect to be
called is our copy constructor
right here on line 47.
So let's do that, so I
think I double clicked.
What really happened was that our
derived copy constructor got called.
And then it immediately called
our base copy constructor
and we passed in other.
Now remember, other was or
is a derived object here.
But now I'm up here in my base class
copy constructor, but look at other.
You can see what I passed in.
Now it's a 100, right.
But other originally had
that doubled value as well.
So that got sliced out.
And the only piece that
we're interested in is the
base part of that object.
So that's what's happening here.
So we'll continue executing this.
Now we just copy constructed our base.
And when we come back right
here on line 48 and 49,
we've set double value.
And now our derived copy
constructor is done.
So you can see that the derived copy
constructor, and you'll see that
on the output right here,
you see that the derived copy constructor
invoked the base copy constructor.
And it passed in that derived
object to it, which got sliced.
Okay, so last thing left
to do is the assignment
operator, the copy assignment.
So now we're going to say d equals
d1 or assign d1 to d, right.
So we're here.
We expect line 52 to execute
right here, that's our copy
assignment for derived.
So I'll click this.
I'll try to click it once.
Good. So now that's we're on line 53 now.
We're simply going to display
derived operator equals.
We're going to check
for self-assignment.
And now what I want to do is I want
to copy the right-hand side to the
left hand-side but only the base part.
So in this case, I want to call my
bass classes overloaded operator
and pass in right-hand side.
So now take a look at right-hand side.
Right-hand side is a derived, right.
So it's got a base, and it's got
its derived double value here.
But watch what happens when I call
that method, right here you'll
see I'll transfer control to it.
And this is where I'm at
right here on line 25.
Look at that object now,
look at right-hand side.
Notice that now it
just -- it's a base now.
So it just got sliced, right.
That double part is
not part of a base.
So it's sliced out.
So now we just keep executing, we're
going to execute the base operator
equal, which assigns the right-hand
side's value to the left-hand
side's value or this in this case
since it's a member function.
And we just assigned the base part.
We're now on line 57.
We're going to take care of the double
value part of us, and we are done.
That's it.
Pretty straightforward.
Now obviously these values are
going to be the same because we
just assigned them, and they both
have a base part and a derived part.
Now they're going to go out
of scope, so we need to unwind
and then destroy these objects.
So the destructor will be
called in the reverse order
of the constructors, right.
So the first destructor that will
be called is the one for d1 here.
And we'll execute that.
And you can see that the
derived destructor executes
followed by the base destructor
right up here on line 32.
There we go, and then the same thing
will happen with the next object.
And our program is done.
Okay, so this gives you some
insight into the way that
the derived constructors
and copy constructors work.
You can see it really makes sense.
The only thing that might be a
little confusing at the beginning
is that, for example, our derived
copy constructor and operator equal
expect a derived, and the base class
versions expect a base, same here.
But that's where the slicing comes in.
We can certainly pass a derived into
here because the derived is a base.
Okay, so that covers it.
If there are any questions,
please let me know.